>> Kyle Simpson: So these pure
functions that we're talking about,
what does that mean?
What do we mean by a pure function?
Well, the first way we could define
a pure function is as we have designed so
far, it is the function in this
spirit of functional programming.
It is a function that takes
all of its inputs as direct,
all of its outputs as direct,
and it has no side effects.
That's the first way of thinking
about a pure function, but
remember and
we'll come back to this in a bit.
Remember, that I've pointed out
it's not about the function
definition itself for JavaScript,
but rather about the function call.
There really isn't such a thing
as a pure function per se
there is a pure function call.
And that's the thing that we wanna go
after, we want pure function calls.
So yes, we could look at the addTwo
function, and if we were to call it with
two inputs and get a single output out,
that would be a pure function call.
addAnother here however, line 7,
it takes two inputs, yes,
but notice how it also uses a z
variable that's outside of itself.
>> Kyle Simpson: So
that's an indirect input.
And in the strictest sense, using
an indirect input invalidates something
about the nature of what we were supposed
to be able to expect about this function.
We're supposed to be able prove and
predict its behavior.
And because we're relying
upon a side cause,
a side effect,
now we can't really be as sure.
We can't really prove it through
the math in the same way.
>> Kyle Simpson: So that's the kind
of thing that we want to be aware of,
is if we're accessing variables outside
of our self is that in validating,
is it removing,
is it watering down those benefits
from functional programming for us?
It's more complicated than that, though.
It's not just that we can't access
a variable outside of ourselves.
We talked about all the other kinds of
side effects like generating random
numbers and all of that other stuff.
But it's also the case that we could
access a variable outside of ourself and
not invalidate our function purity,
it is more complicated.
But that's a clear signal, it's like
a usual suspect that keys you in,
if you see an access
of a variable outside,
immediately you should be asking
yourself why, why is that?
Is that necessary, is that useful,
is that important?
>> Kyle Simpson: Because
the code might look like this.
The code might have a z
variable in the outer scope and
in this case, line 1,
it's a constant, z = 1.
Now, if on line 8 instead of accessing z,
if I had accessed just the value,
if I'd said add to x, y, and then just
said plus 1, we would all say no problem.
That looks like a pure function,
no side effects, no side causes.
So is the introduction of z here
really a side cause or not?
Cuz if we think about what
a constant is supposed to be,
a constant is supposed to be
a semantic placeholder for a value.
And especially since we're using the const
keyword, but even if we weren't, because
it is a constant, it doesn't change
throughout the lifetime of the program.
>> Kyle Simpson: So really is it
invalidating this as an impure function,
or is addAnother simply referring to
a semantic constant placeholder here?
>> Kyle Simpson: If you could convince
yourself that line 11 is a pure
function call,
and there will be more layers of meaning
to what we mean by pure function call.
But here addAnother does in fact returned
to us the value 42 when we pass in 20 and
21, and it doesn't change anything
else about the state of the program,.
So it doesn't cause any side effects, and
it doesn't use any side effects
other than this constant.
And I would submit to you that it
is therefore still consistent with
functional principles.
>> Kyle Simpson: That line 11 still
counts as a pure function call,
even though we're accessing
a variable outside of ourselves.
Now, you may be able to convince
yourself that that is true
because I pointed out that
we're using the const keyword.
But when I switch it up and I say,
what if I use the var keyword?
Some of you may be saying, well,
now it's not a pure function call, really?
Is my choice of const verses var here
actually going to impact
the readability of this program.
Some say yes, but
am gonna say, I don't think so.
And here is the reason and
this is critical for
all the rest of our discussion.
If it were possible for
me to show you a code snippet that only
had part of the program, and
I were to ask you questions about it, and
I was only showing you
part of the program.
Then you could say virtually anything,
because just about anything else could
also be true in that other part
that I was hiding from you, right?
So its in a sense not
useful to discuss a program
unless we're discussing
it in its entirety.
For our purposes of our
discussion in this course
we need to assume that we
see the entire program.
So let me ask you the question,
anywhere in this program
does z ever get re-assigned?
We can see all the lines of code and
we know that it doesn't get reassigned.
So let me ask you a question, is z serving
the purpose of a constant in this program?
>> Kyle Simpson: I would submit that
it is, whether use the const keyword or
not it is a constant in practice.
And therefore, every bit as much in
the spirit of functional program.
Now I know many functional programmers,
that
are absolutely enamored with the const
keyword, they use it all over the place.
I don't think the const keyword buys
anything for the functional programmer.
Because the real important key is,
is the variable getting reassigned,
not can it be reassigned or not?
>> Kyle Simpson: And in fact,
more important even than whether it gets
assigned, or can it be reassigned is, is
it obvious to the reader that it can't be
reassigned, that it doesn't get
reassigned, is that obvious?
Const has some problems because
it looks like it is making
values that don't change when actually
it's making variables that get reassigned.
And we're gonna come back to that
topic when we talk about immutability.
But I would submit to you
that in this program,
z still serves that role and therefore,
addAnother is still when it's called on
line 11 that's pure a still function call.
>> Kyle Simpson: But none of you seem
to raise your hand and yell at me,
wait a minute, why is it a pure function
when we're using another variable called
addTwo, which is a variable that happens
to reference a different function.
You see how easily you just skipped right
over the usage of that variable and
zeroed in on the z variable and said,
wait a minute, that one that's a problem.
Why is it that we get to
use the addTwo variable?
Just because it points to a function?
I have news for you,
the addTwo variable, the identifier that
points at that function from line 3,
that identifier is not a constant.
It is in fact possible that addTwo could
get reassigned somewhere to a different
function definition.
So it's no more a constant than is var z,
and yet
we can still say that in this program,
we can see that addTwo
does not get reassigned.
And so the behavior of line 11,
is still that we observably
have a pure function call.
>> Kyle Simpson: Functional programmers,
by the way, they do this all the time.
And I don't hear them talk much about it,
it's just one of those things
that they assume you get.
That if you're referencing
a thing that doesn't ever change,
it's exactly as if it had been in lined,
which is the whole point of constants.
>> Kyle Simpson: Functional programmers
use functions inside of other functions
all the time and
they don't always pass those functions in.
You don't always see the 14 lambda
utilities getting passed in as inputs to a
function, and yet you can still use them.
Because it is assumed that lambda and
all of the methods on lambda
are in practice, constants.
Meaning that they don't change
their definition throughout
the lifetime of the program.
And why I'm hammering on this
point is because it emphasizes
our responsibilities the author
of the code to make it as
obvious as possible that
something is a constant.
>> Kyle Simpson: That it's
gonna behave as a constant.
One way you could do that is
with the const keyword, but
I don't think that's the more
effective way to do it.
>> Kyle Simpson: Matter of fact, because
of the baggage that const comes with,
I don't think it's actually serving
a net benefit to your program,
more on that later as I promised.
But whether you use the const keyword or
not, if you make it obvious for
the reader that it's gonna behave
as a constant, that's the key, why?
Why though, it's because we want
the reader of our code to understand,
I don't need to worry
that that thing changed.
If they were trying to
understand line 8 and
they didn't know that z was a constant,
well now all of a sudden they're like,
they're dealing with all the problems
that you have to deal with when you
juggle side effects on your head, right?
As a matter of fact, if they really
didn't know whether z got reassigned or
not, how many lines of code
would they have to execute
to convince themselves
what line 11 would do?
Well, actually they have to mentally
execute lines 1 through 10 to get to that
point, because theoretically at least,
any of those lines could have changed z.
>> Kyle Simpson: So if they're not sure
whether it's going to stay that same value
it's going to act as a constant, then
essentially to read your code means they
have to execute everything before
that line to understand that line.
That's the real problem with side effects,
is that it creates this
outcome which is that to understand any
given line, we have to mentally execute
everything before it so that we know what
state the program was in before we ran it.
But if the addAnother function call
is reliably and obviously pure,
then I can execute line 11 completely in
isolation of all the rest of the program.
Not only do I not need to run anything
before line 11 to figure out what line
11 does,
I also don't need to worry that line 11 is
gonna affect anything else in the program.
And that's the real benefit of a pure
function call, it isolates that line so
that I can analyze it independently.